Add developer docs for the syntactic stage (#1284)
pyccel/pyccel: developer_docs/syntactic_stage.md

The syntactic stage is described by the file [pyccel.parser.syntactic](../pyccel/parser/syntactic.py)

The syntactic stage serves 4 main purposes:
1.  [**Navigation and AST Creation**](#Navigation-and-ast-creation) : Convert Python's [AST](https://docs.Python.org/3/library/ast.html) (abstract syntax tree) representation of the Python file to Pyccel's AST representation (objects of the classes in the folder [pyccel.ast](../pyccel/ast))
2.  [**Errors**](#Errors) : Raise an error for any syntax used that is not yet supported by pyccel
3.  [**Headers**](#Headers) : Convert header comments from strings to Pyccel's AST representation
4.  [**Scoping**](#Scoping) : Collect the name of all variables in each scope (see [scope](scope.md) for more details) to ensure no name collisions can occur if pyccel generates Variable names

## Navigation and AST Creation

The entry point for the class `SyntaxParser` is the function `parse`.
This function is called from the constructor to examine a FST (Full Syntax Tree) object.
The FST is the output of Python's `ast.parse` function with comments inserted using the [`pyccel.parser.extend_tree.extend_tree`](../pyccel/parser/extend_tree.py).

> Python's ast module discards all comments, so the function [`pyccel.parser.extend_tree.extend_tree`](../pyccel/parser/extend_tree.py) is needed to read the file and reinsert these comments at the correct location.

Reviewer: I find that pyccel.parser.extend_tree.extend_tree is redundant. Wouldn't be better to write : 

```suggestion
The FST is the output of Python's `ast.parse` function with comments inserted at the correct location using the [`pyccel.parser.extend_tree.extend_tree`](../pyccel/parser/extend_tree.py), since Python's ast module discards all comments.
```
instead of lines 15 and 16 ?

Author: I agree. Better: a098fb89 ?

Reviewer: yes, much better ?

# Syntactic Stage

The syntactic stage is described by the file [pyccel.parser.syntactic](../pyccel/parser/syntactic.py)

The syntactic stage serves 4 main purposes:

> 1.  Convert Python's [AST](https://docs.python.org/3/library/ast.html) (abstract syntax tree) representation of the python file to Pyccel's AST representation (objects of the classes in the folder [pyccel.ast](../pyccel/ast))

Reviewer 2: I think it is not clear how this conversion is done. It would be ideal if we could map each of the following to its equivalent in pyccel.
````
-- ASDL's 4 builtin types are:
-- identifier, int, string, constant

module Python
{
    mod = Module(stmt* body, type_ignore* type_ignores)
        | Interactive(stmt* body)
        | Expression(expr body)
        | FunctionType(expr* argtypes, expr returns)

    stmt = FunctionDef(identifier name, arguments args,
                       stmt* body, expr* decorator_list, expr? returns,
                       string? type_comment)
          | AsyncFunctionDef(identifier name, arguments args,
                             stmt* body, expr* decorator_list, expr? returns,
                             string? type_comment)

          | ClassDef(identifier name,
             expr* bases,
             keyword* keywords,
             stmt* body,
             expr* decorator_list)
          | Return(expr? value)

          | Delete(expr* targets)
          | Assign(expr* targets, expr value, string? type_comment)
          | AugAssign(expr target, operator op, expr value)
          -- 'simple' indicates that we annotate simple name without parens
          | AnnAssign(expr target, expr annotation, expr? value, int simple)

          -- use 'orelse' because else is a keyword in target languages
          | For(expr target, expr iter, stmt* body, stmt* orelse, string? type_comment)
          | AsyncFor(expr target, expr iter, stmt* body, stmt* orelse, string? type_comment)
          | While(expr test, stmt* body, stmt* orelse)
          | If(expr test, stmt* body, stmt* orelse)
          | With(withitem* items, stmt* body, string? type_comment)
          | AsyncWith(withitem* items, stmt* body, string? type_comment)

          | Match(expr subject, match_case* cases)

          | Raise(expr? exc, expr? cause)
          | Try(stmt* body, excepthandler* handlers, stmt* orelse, stmt* finalbody)
          | TryStar(stmt* body, excepthandler* handlers, stmt* orelse, stmt* finalbody)
          | Assert(expr test, expr? msg)

          | Import(alias* names)
          | ImportFrom(identifier? module, alias* names, int? level)

          | Global(identifier* names)
          | Nonlocal(identifier* names)
          | Expr(expr value)
          | Pass | Break | Continue

          -- col_offset is the byte offset in the utf8 string the parser uses
          attributes (int lineno, int col_offset, int? end_lineno, int? end_col_offset)

          -- BoolOp() can use left & right?
    expr = BoolOp(boolop op, expr* values)
         | NamedExpr(expr target, expr value)
         | BinOp(expr left, operator op, expr right)
         | UnaryOp(unaryop op, expr operand)
         | Lambda(arguments args, expr body)
         | IfExp(expr test, expr body, expr orelse)
         | Dict(expr* keys, expr* values)
         | Set(expr* elts)
         | ListComp(expr elt, comprehension* generators)
         | SetComp(expr elt, comprehension* generators)
         | DictComp(expr key, expr value, comprehension* generators)
         | GeneratorExp(expr elt, comprehension* generators)
         -- the grammar constrains where yield expressions can occur
         | Await(expr value)
         | Yield(expr? value)
         | YieldFrom(expr value)
         -- need sequences for compare to distinguish between
         -- x < 4 < 3 and (x < 4) < 3
         | Compare(expr left, cmpop* ops, expr* comparators)
         | Call(expr func, expr* args, keyword* keywords)
         | FormattedValue(expr value, int conversion, expr? format_spec)
         | JoinedStr(expr* values)
         | Constant(constant value, string? kind)

         -- the following expression can appear in assignment context
         | Attribute(expr value, identifier attr, expr_context ctx)
         | Subscript(expr value, expr slice, expr_context ctx)
         | Starred(expr value, expr_context ctx)
         | Name(identifier id, expr_context ctx)
         | List(expr* elts, expr_context ctx)
         | Tuple(expr* elts, expr_context ctx)

         -- can appear only in Subscript
         | Slice(expr? lower, expr? upper, expr? step)

          -- col_offset is the byte offset in the utf8 string the parser uses
          attributes (int lineno, int col_offset, int? end_lineno, int? end_col_offset)

    expr_context = Load | Store | Del

    boolop = And | Or

    operator = Add | Sub | Mult | MatMult | Div | Mod | Pow | LShift
                 | RShift | BitOr | BitXor | BitAnd | FloorDiv

    unaryop = Invert | Not | UAdd | USub

    cmpop = Eq | NotEq | Lt | LtE | Gt | GtE | Is | IsNot | In | NotIn

    comprehension = (expr target, expr iter, expr* ifs, int is_async)

    excepthandler = ExceptHandler(expr? type, identifier? name, stmt* body)
                    attributes (int lineno, int col_offset, int? end_lineno, int? end_col_offset)

    arguments = (arg* posonlyargs, arg* args, arg? vararg, arg* kwonlyargs,
                 expr* kw_defaults, arg? kwarg, expr* defaults)

    arg = (identifier arg, expr? annotation, string? type_comment)
           attributes (int lineno, int col_offset, int? end_lineno, int? end_col_offset)

    -- keyword arguments supplied to call (NULL identifier for **kwargs)
    keyword = (identifier? arg, expr value)
               attributes (int lineno, int col_offset, int? end_lineno, int? end_col_offset)

    -- import name with optional 'as' alias.
    alias = (identifier name, identifier? asname)
             attributes (int lineno, int col_offset, int? end_lineno, int? end_col_offset)

    withitem = (expr context_expr, expr? optional_vars)

    match_case = (pattern pattern, expr? guard, stmt* body)

    pattern = MatchValue(expr value)
            | MatchSingleton(constant value)
            | MatchSequence(pattern* patterns)
            | MatchMapping(expr* keys, pattern* patterns, identifier? rest)
            | MatchClass(expr cls, pattern* patterns, identifier* kwd_attrs, pattern* kwd_patterns)

            | MatchStar(identifier? name)
            -- The optional "rest" MatchMapping parameter handles capturing extra mapping keys

            | MatchAs(pattern? pattern, identifier? name)
            | MatchOr(pattern* patterns)

             attributes (int lineno, int col_offset, int end_lineno, int end_col_offset)

    type_ignore = TypeIgnore(int lineno, string tag)
}
```
This would also give an overview of has been implemented so far.
Maybe write an asdl for pyccel too

Author: I don't think it should be clear how the conversion is done at this point. This is an overview of how the stage works. Not a description of everything in the file. And at this point, it is a very abstract overview to give the aims. I have added a link to make it clear that more explanations will be provided later in the file: c83a90cd

What you describe could be placed in the relevant section, but personally, I tend to think that long lists like this are only read if the reader is looking for something specific, otherwise, they just interrupt the flow of the reading.
So, while a list could be useful somewhere, I don't think this is the place for it. I think there should instead be a link to a page where this is available. However, if we have a link, then I don't think it necessarily needs to link to our docs. Letting python document python code ensures that the reader can easily find the documentation for their version of python. Just as an example, in your list above `NamedExpr` only exists from python 3.8 onwards.

I would be interested to know what other people think though.  @pyccel/pyccel-dev do you prefer docs to have everything in one place? Or to have a clear overview with more detailed information available if necessary?

I am also against maintaining any kind of list like this unless it is auto-generated.
If it is not auto-generated then we will forget to maintain it.
I am not familiar with ADSL so I don't know if there is a way to do this?
Is there something in sphinx?

>  It would be ideal if we could map each of the following to its equivalent in pyccel.

You mean copy/paste the `_visit_X` functions into a file? I don't know that I see this as particularly useful. Is it really easier for developers to search for this information in text rather than inside a file? Again I'm happy to go with the majority if other people disagree @pyccel/pyccel-dev but I would rather this was in another (ideally auto-generated) file

2.  Raise an error for any syntax used that is not yet supported by pyccel

> 3.  Convert header comments from strings to Pyccel's AST representation

Reviewer 2: Can this line be used to reference the CommentLine and the CommentMultiline classes?

Author: I would rather do that in the header section than in the overview. But otherwise yes, it can be updated to do this. Should I point at the code given that the sphinx docs are not yet ready?

Reviewer 2: Thank you! I think we should come up with a scheme to reference missing documentation so it can be written as soon as possible. Maybe distinguish between pointing to autogenerated doc / hand written doc. With the sphinx doc being what it is currently, i don't see how we could point to specific classes and methods. pages are generated for modules only.

Author: For now I am not pointing to anything that does not exist yet. Pointing to code is equally hard as you need to keep the line numbers updated.

Does the sphinx HTML not contain ids that you can link to? Maybe only once you have the settings right so everything has its own section?

4.  Collect the name of all variables in each scope (see [scope](scope.md) for more details) to ensure no name collisions can occur if pyccel generates Variable names

## Navigation and AST Creation

The entry point for the class `SyntaxParser` is the function `parse`.
This function is called from the constructor to examine a FST (Full Syntax Tree) object.
The FST is the output of Python's `ast.parse` function with comments inserted using the [`pyccel.parser.extend_tree.extend_tree`](../pyccel/parser/extend_tree.py).
Python's ast module discards all comments, so the function [`pyccel.parser.extend_tree.extend_tree`](../pyccel/parser/extend_tree.py) is needed to read the file and reinsert these comments at the correct location.

The key line of the function `parse` is the call to `self._visit(self.fst)`.
All elements of the tree must be visited.
The `_visit` function internally calls a function named `_visit_X`, where `X` is the type of the object.
This function must have the form:
```python
def _visit_ClassName(self, stmt):
    ...
```

> Each of these functions should internally call the `_visit` function on each of the elements of the object to obtain Pyccel AST nodes which can be combined to create a Pyccel AST node representing the current object.

Reviewer 2: An example is greatly appreciated here. Maybe a walktrough of the visits for a function definition

Author: A `FunctionDefinition` is one of the most complicated objects in pyccel, so I'm not sure it is well adapted to an introductory example. Maybe a for loop?

Author: Better fb39e982 ?

Reviewer 2: Yes, thank you very much!

> Each of these functions should internally call the `_visit` function on each of the elements of the object to obtain Pyccel AST nodes which can be combined to create a Pyccel AST node representing the current object.

Reviewer: which functions does **these functions ** refer to ?

Author: Better b71dd369 ?

Reviewer: Yes, it's much more explicit now. Thank you !

> 

Reviewer 2: I think we should do the same regarding nodes and their respective _visit functions. This may seem unnecessary but it will allow the redirection to the docs of all visit functions.

Author: > I think we should do the same 

Meaning? Write a list of all `_visit` functions? Is this not what the doc of all visit functions is for?

Reviewer 2: Nevermind then, it stemmed from the same need to have everything in one place.

## Errors

Error handling uses the classes in the file [pyccel.errors.errors](../pyccel/errors/errors.py).
Errors in the syntactic stage should raise a `PyccelSyntaxError`.
Where possible this should be done by accessing the `Errors()` singleton and calling the `report` function.
This function takes several arguments (see docstring for more details).
The most important arguments are:
-   _message_ : Describe the issue that lead to the error

-   _symbol_ : The Python ast object should be passed here. This object contains information about its position in the file (line number, column) which ensures the user can more easily locate their error

-   _severity_ : The severity level must be one of the following:
    -   _warning_ : An error will be printed but Pyccel will continue executing
    -   _error_ : An error will be printed but Pyccel will continue executing the syntactic stage

>     -   _fatal_ : An error will be printed and Pyccel will stop executing. This level should rarely be needed in the syntactic stage as a failure in one function should not affect the execution of another. It is preferable to show the users all errors at once

Reviewer 2: Is execution the right word here? it gives the impression that we are not in the syntactic stage, it has a _runtimy_ feel to it.

Author: I'm not sure what you mean? Are you perhaps confusing `pyccel` and `epyccel`? The executable `pyccel` stops executing. This is at runtime (although in python there is not really an alternative as there is no compile time)

Reviewer 2: No, I meant that `execution of another` implies that a function is being executed, when in actuality it is rather syntacticly parsed or its syntactic parsing is executed not the function itself.  the following sounds better to me:
> This level should rarely be needed in the syntactic stage as a failure in __parsing__ one function should not affect the __parsing__ of another. It is preferable to show the users all errors at once

Author: Hmmm, now I see what you mean. But the functions I am talking about here are the `_visit_X` functions not the python functions being translated.  E.g. the failure of `_visit_Dict` shouldn't stop `_visit_List` working. You can have both a list and a dictionary in the same function

Author: How about:
> This level should rarely be needed in the syntactic stage as a failure in one visitation function should not affect the execution of another

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I misunderstood. I thought you were taking a function as an example of what's beiing parsed. Now, I totally agree with you. What do you think of clearly stating that we are talking about `_visit_X` functions?

Author: I agree. That is what I tried to do by saying "visitation function". Is this not clear? Do you have a suggestion?

Author: > This level should rarely be needed in the syntactic stage as a failure in one visitation function (`_visit_X`) should not affect the execution of another

?

Reviewer 2: Perfect!

Author: Fixed : d607b56b
(By the way, it is for you to decide when I have adequately responded to your comment and resolve the conversations once you're happy)

## Headers

The headers (type declarations/openmp pragmas/etc) also have their own syntax which cannot be parsed by Python's ast module.
The module [textx](http://textx.github.io/textX/stable/) is used to parse these statements.
The files describing the _textx_ grammar are found in the folder [pyccel.parser.grammar](../pyccel/parser/grammar).
From these files _textx_ generates instances of the classes found in the folder [pyccel.parser.syntax](../pyccel/parser/syntax).

> These instances can then be inserted into the annotated syntax tree.

Reviewer 2: This is the first mention of _annotated syntax tree_. Do you think it should have been passively introduced above?

Author: Oops. It should be _abstract syntax tree_
Fixed 046b880d

The names are saved in the scope (for more details see [scope](scope.md)).
Whenever a symbol is encountered it should be saved to the scope using the function `self.scope.insert_symbol`.
Any functions visiting a class which inherits from `ScopedNode` must create a new scope before visiting objects and exit it after everything inside the scope has been visited.
The scope must then be passed to the class using the keyword argument `scope`.
Care should be taken here as this keyword is not compulsory[^1].

[^1]: The keyword cannot currently be compulsory due to some old code and the special case of `FunctionDef`. A `FunctionDef` which represents a function defined in a header file has no body, and therefore no scope.

A child scope can be created using one of the following functions (for more details see the docstrings in [pyccel.parser.scope](../pyccel/parser/scope.py):
-   `Scope.new_child_scope`
-   `Scope.create_new_loop_scope`
-   `Scope.create_product_loop_scope`

Occasionally it is necessary to create objects in the syntactic stage.
The `Scope` functions should be used for this purpose to avoid name collisions.
See the [scope](scope.md) docs for more details.

> In all cases it is preferable to delay this stage as much as possible to ensure that as much information is known about the scope as possible.

Reviewer 2: to delay this stage as ~~much~~ **long** as possible

Author: Fixed 8bca0416
